Tony Kaizen:
What's up, my friend? You are listening to the Life in
English podcast. I'm your host, Tony Kaizen, and today I'm
going to tell you about a mental issue that is almost
certainly making your life harder than it needs to be. And
that issue is the "action bias". The term
"action bias" refers to our tendency to prefer action to
inaction, even if there's no evidence that doing something
is better than doing nothing. You know those situations when
you feel helpless and you say, "Well, I can't just sit here
and do nothing." That is the action bias at work. So how
does it affect us? Well, on an individual level, it causes
us to waste time and energy doing things that have
absolutely no positive impact on the situation. In fact,
there are times when our impulsive need to act ends up
making the situation worse. An example I'm sure most of us
have experienced is when we're stuck in a traffic jam on the
freeway. I mean, you know how it is. Every single car is
going three miles per hour at most. Countless cars are
trying to merge onto the freeway and every time traffic
stops or someone tries to merge, some jackass feels the need
to honk his horn repeatedly, as if that's somehow going to
make the situation better. The action bias compels this
jackass to honk his horn because the idea of doing nothing
in such a frustrating situation is unacceptable to him. He
says to himself, "I bet if I just keep honking the horn, the
entire freeway will part like the Red Sea, and I'll be able
to drive straight home." But what usually happens is the
jackass gets cut off in traffic, he honks his horn
excessively, then he sees that the honking is doing nothing
but by that time, he's already angry and possessed by his
need to act so he furiously follows the car that cut him off
until it stops. Then he gets out of his car and tries to
attack the driver, for example:
Reporter:
"Houston police got a call shortly before 9 am.
Investigators say a man was driving this white truck down
Airport Boulevard near Mykawa when a red truck cut him off.
They say the man in the white truck then tried to catch up
to the red truck, but witnesses told police he caught up to
the wrong red truck and he began following the truck. Inside
that truck was a woman taking her eight-year-old son to
school. When they reached the stoplight at Airport and
Telephone Road, investigators say the man got out of his
vehicle with a metal rod and broke the rear window of the
woman's truck. They say that's when the woman in the red
truck pulled out her pistol and shot the man once in the
arm."
Houston Police Detective:
"One male victim was shot. Uh, he has been transported to
the, uh, local hospital, like, in critical but stable
condition. I do believe at this time he will...he is
expected to survive."
Reporter:
"The woman was detained for questioning and investigators
even asked her to reenact the incident. The alleged
aggressor will survive, but officers have some advice for
those angry drivers:"
Houston Police Detective:
"Try to just let it go. That's all I can say. Just let it
go, because it's not...it's not really...it's not worth it.
Not worth someone's life."
Tony Kaizen:
Now in modern society, doing nothing is typically seen in a
negative light. For example, whenever we witness some form
of social injustice, we say illogical things like, "If you
remain silent and you don't take action, that means you
agree with what is happening." In other words, doing
something is better than doing nothing. Whenever a social
cause goes viral on the internet, every company in the
Western world has to create a marketing campaign and a
fucking hashtag to show that they stand with whatever social
group is being exploited this month. These empty actions
receive praise and applause, even though they're not having
any lasting positive effect on the situation. Why? The
action bias. Now, it's still unclear as to why we've
developed this cognitive bias. Some people believe it was
passed down by our ancestors who lived as hunter gatherers.
Back then, failing to take action could literally mean dying
of thirst, starvation, or predators attack. So this impulse
to take action is in some way a survival tactic, depending
on how you look at it. But the problem with this bias is
that we don't really need it to survive as much as we did in
the past. Now, others believe our need to take action comes
from our need to feel like we're in control. When we take
action, it feels like we're having an impact. It feels like
progress. And when we do nothing, we feel helpless and it
feels like we've given up. In other words, doing something
makes us feel better about ourselves than doing nothing,
which further reinforces this habit of acting impulsively.
Now, some believe this bias is continuously reinforced by
society. There are so many situations in which those who
take action are rewarded while those who do nothing are
punished. For example, if a woman is being harassed in the
street, the man who steps in to protect her is a hero. And
the men who sit by and watch are shameful cowards. Students
who participate in class are often favored by their teachers
and get better grades, while the quiet ones often get
ignored and left behind. In society, you're seen as a loser
if you never do anything with your life. We applaud those
who do. We praise people's accomplishments.
We chant their names and we give them lifetime achievement
awards. This only further reinforces the idea that the way
to get respect, praise, and admiration is by doing
something, especially if you're a man. A man who does
nothing is called a bum. He has no utility and therefore he
has no value in society. And once we internalise this
illogical idea, we allow it to influence all of our
decisions. We're motivated by our fear of being a loser or
losing control of the situation. We feel the need to take
action at times when doing nothing is probably the best
choice. In episode 94 of this podcast, I posed the question,
"How long are you going to watch?" And I was implying that
you must take action; you must participate in the game of
life. But the reality is, my idea of a good life may be
different from yours. I mean, who's to say that you have to
do something with your life? Some people are content with
observing. Some people are content with staying still. And
whether that's good or bad is really up for them to decide.
So in summary, the true origin of this cognitive bias is
still a mystery, but it seems that it's part nature and part
nurture like many human behaviors. But you might be sitting
there asking yourself, "Why should I care? Why does this
matter?" Well, we typically equate action with productivity,
and productivity is also something we tend to value very
highly. However, doing nothing can often be better and more
productive than doing something. Now, let's go back to the
example of the traffic jam. You're in bumper-to-bumper
traffic on the highway, right? You're going three miles per
hour and you still got 30 miles to go. You can do the math
on that one. So naturally, you start to get frustrated and
you decide to get off at the next exit so you can take a
faster route home. But that decision quickly backfires when
you realize that there's more traffic on the city streets
than there was on the highway. You end up making more stops,
more turns, and driving a longer distance just to get home.
And all of that means you used more gas, which means you
spent more money. So logic tells us that staying on the
highway is more efficient, but getting off the highway makes
us feel better. When we sit in traffic, we feel like we're
getting nowhere. We feel helpless amidst the endless sea of
automobiles that won't just get out of our way. But when we
get off the highway, we can drive at a regular speed. We're
not stuck in the same spot for minutes at a time. We feel
like we're taking the situation into our own hands and
having a positive impact. But the most productive thing to
do is actually nothing at all. The most logical thing to do
in rush hour traffic is to accept the fact that you cannot
outsmart rush hour traffic. So you should care about
cognitive biases like these because being aware of them
enables us to make more productive decisions that are based
on logic instead of impulsive feelings. In other words, we
can train ourselves to do what makes sense and not just what
feels good in the moment. And there are many times when we
don't know exactly what to do. And our automatic response to
that feeling of indecision is often to take action without
even considering the possibility that it would be better to
do nothing. This affects us on a personal and societal level
alike. Whether you're in traffic, at school, or at work, the
action bias will be present. You will find it in government
buildings where public policies are made. You will find it
in doctors' offices where diagnoses are given. You will find
it in investment firms where money is put at risk. And we
don't know exactly how this bias was developed, but it seems
clear that we as a society continue to reinforce it by
rewarding those who take action and punishing those who
don't. If we're not careful, this cognitive bias can land us
in some very senseless, unproductive situations simply
because we feel incapable of sitting back and letting things
happen. Our desperate need for control could be the very
thing that causes us to lose it. We've got to be more
cognizant of our faulty logic so we can begin to overcome it
and make more productive and efficient decisions. But
developing this skill is a longterm process that requires us
to cultivate an incredible level of self-control. And
there's no easy way to do this. In my experience, you simply
got to pay much more attention to your impulsive feelings
and then get in the habit of pausing and taking a moment to
really think about what you're feeling in that moment.
Before you can decide what you're going to do about your
feelings, it's best to understand where the feelings are
coming from, or in other words, why you feel the way you do.
You tend to do things based on the way you feel.
So if you never understand why you feel the way you do, you
will never understand why you do the things you do. You
understand? I want you to imagine a scenario with me:
Imagine walking down the street and seeing a man slap
himself in the face repeatedly. Slap, slap, slap.
Again and again. And naturally, this confuses you so you
walk up to him and you ask, "Why are you doing that?" And
the man pauses for a second. And he looks at you with a
straight face and says, "I don't know." That's
what you look like when you allow yourself to be controlled
by impulsive feeling instead of using a logical thought
process to make decisions. You look like the guy on the
street corner who's slapping himself for no reason, unable
to figure out why his face hurts so fucking much. But once
you realize you're slapping yourself and you stop to think
about why you're doing it, you might realize that deep down,
you just want to see yourself in pain so you impulsively do
these stupid things that you subconsciously know will only
bring you more pain. Now, with this newfound knowledge, you
could begin to monitor your feelings with a more educated
eye and start to notice what triggers those impulsive
feelings. Once you identify the triggers, you can begin to
remove them from your life or at least develop a better,
more logical response to those triggers. One that's actually
productive and in your best interest, as opposed to one that
just feels good in the moment. And the point is not to favor
doing nothing over doing something. I'm not saying we should
glorify inaction.
I'm saying that we should develop the habit of pausing to
think before we act on impulse. There are times when
decisive action is necessary, but there are also many times
when doing nothing is absolutely the best choice. And the
only way we can learn to identify these situations is by
paying closer attention to the motives behind our actions
and even more importantly, the possible outcomes. I want to
thank you for your time and attention, my friend.
I really hope this episode is giving you something
interesting to think about. And you already know, this is
the Life in English podcast. I am your host, Tony Kaizen,
and I'll talk to you soon. Peace!